**Individual contribution and learning outcome**
During the project I worked mostly with the gene finding and annotation part. I have learned a lot. From barely knowing what unix is at the beginning of the course, I now feel somewhat confident in working with it and also knowing how to navigate through the many forums where people have had the same problems as I have, to solve the problems I encounter.

In the project specifically, there has been so many problems with the reference transcriptome and not having a GFF file that we have constantly been looking for alternative ways to solve things. One thing I have learned during the project is that many programs and packages does all the steps and it can be a lot of work to try to use a package for a single task. For example, I spent a lot of time trying to use ORFik before I realized that it is object oriented and was not fit for my purposes. Further, I have read through a ridiculous amounts of README files for different packages, created conda environments and tried to implement before the code we provided you in the final report was reached.  

The other main thing I have learned is that everything takes at least double the time that you’ve expected and that working smart is crucial when handling data this size.

Even though we have not been able to reproduce the original study at all, all the struggles we’ve gone through has really given me an understanding of the different steps in a bioinformatics study. I now know what most of the file formats (fasta, fastq, sam, bam, gff, counts etc.) are, how to obtain them (to some extent), how they are structured and what they are used for. I now understand the importance of alignment, and also after the lectures I understand why it’s so problematic. To someone who has never done a bioinformatics study before, I now know it would have been smarter to choose an organism that has been more studied and has more data already available since “only” the assembly part is a whole project on it’s own. Further I understand the value of a counts file, since I now have had first-hand experience of not being able to annotate and find what position the probable genes in the transcriptome and therefore not being able to do any real analysis such as DE analysis.

Also, working with git for the first time has been challenging but it has really been a great experience and I’ve learned it’s a great tool!

